packages/wellcrafted/src/query/README.md, before:

# Query Utilities

A factory pattern for creating TanStack Query definitions with built-in Result type handling. This module provides a clean way to organize your data fetching layer in an RPC-like pattern.

## Quick Start

```typescript
import { QueryClient } from '@tanstack/query-core';
import { createQueryFactories } from 'wellcrafted/query';

// Create your query client
const queryClient = new QueryClient();

// Create factory functions
const { defineQuery, defineMutation } = createQueryFactories(queryClient);
```

## Architecture Pattern: The RPC-like Approach

The query utilities enable a powerful architectural pattern inspired by RPC (Remote Procedure Call), where your query layer acts as a bridge between UI components and pure service functions. This pattern is used successfully in production apps like [Whispering](https://github.com/braden-w/whispering).

```
┌─────────────┐     ┌─────────────┐     ┌──────────────┐
│     UI      │ --> │ Query/RPC   │ --> │   Services   │
│ Components  │     │    Layer    │     │    (Pure)    │
└─────────────┘     └─────────────┘     └──────────────┘
      ↑                    │
      └────────────────────┘
         Reactive Updates
```

### Layer Responsibilities

1. **Services Layer**: Pure functions with no UI dependencies
   - Business logic only
   - Return `Result<T, E>` types
   - Platform-agnostic
   - Easily testable

2. **Query Layer**: Adds reactivity and caching
   - Wraps service calls with TanStack Query
   - Handles runtime dependency injection
   - Transforms errors for UI consumption
   - Manages cache updates

3. **UI Layer**: Consumes queries reactively or imperatively
   - Uses the dual interface pattern
   - Handles loading states
   - Displays errors

## Recommended Folder Structure

Here's how to organize your code for maximum clarity:

```
src/
├── services/           # Pure business logic
│   ├── api/           # External API calls
│   │   ├── users.ts
│   │   └── products.ts
│   ├── db/            # Database operations
│   │   └── index.ts
│   └── platform/      # Platform-specific code
│       ├── web.ts
│       └── desktop.ts
│
├── query/             # Query layer with caching
│   ├── _factories.ts  # createQueryFactories setup
│   ├── users.ts       # User-related queries
│   ├── products.ts    # Product-related queries
│   └── index.ts       # RPC namespace export
│
└── components/        # UI components
    └── UserList.svelte
```

## Real-World Example: Building an RPC Namespace

This example shows how to build a complete data fetching layer:

### Step 1: Create Your Services

```typescript
// services/api/users.ts
import { Ok, Err, type Result } from 'wellcrafted/result';

export type User = {
  id: string;
  name: string;
  email: string;
};

export type UserServiceError = {
  code: 'NOT_FOUND' | 'NETWORK_ERROR' | 'UNAUTHORIZED';
  message: string;
};

export async function getUser(id: string): Promise<Result<User, UserServiceError>> {
  try {
    const response = await fetch(`/api/users/${id}`);
    
    if (!response.ok) {
      if (response.status === 404) {
        return Err({ code: 'NOT_FOUND', message: 'User not found' });
      }
      return Err({ code: 'NETWORK_ERROR', message: 'Failed to fetch user' });
    }
    
    return Ok(await response.json());
  } catch (error) {
    return Err({ code: 'NETWORK_ERROR', message: error.message });
  }
}

export async function updateUser(user: User): Promise<Result<User, UserServiceError>> {
  // Implementation...
}
```

### Step 2: Create Query Definitions

```typescript
// query/_factories.ts
import { QueryClient } from '@tanstack/query-core';
import { createQueryFactories } from 'wellcrafted/query';

export const queryClient = new QueryClient({
  defaultOptions: {
    queries: {
      staleTime: 5 * 60 * 1000, // 5 minutes
      cacheTime: 10 * 60 * 1000, // 10 minutes
    },
  },
});

export const { defineQuery, defineMutation } = createQueryFactories(queryClient);
```

```typescript
// query/users.ts
import { defineQuery, defineMutation, queryClient } from './_factories';
import * as userService from '../services/api/users';

export const users = {
  // Query with parameters
  getUser: (userId: string) => 
    defineQuery({
      queryKey: ['users', userId],
      resultQueryFn: () => userService.getUser(userId),
    }),

  // Query all users
  getAllUsers: defineQuery({
    queryKey: ['users'],
    resultQueryFn: () => userService.getAllUsers(),
  }),

  // Mutation with optimistic updates
  updateUser: defineMutation({
    mutationKey: ['users', 'update'],
    resultMutationFn: async (user: User) => {
      const result = await userService.updateUser(user);
      
      if (result.error) return result;

      // Optimistic cache update
      queryClient.setQueryData(['users', user.id], user);
      queryClient.invalidateQueries({ queryKey: ['users'] });

      return result;
    },
    onError: (error) => {
      // Error is already in the right format for UI
      console.error('Failed to update user:', error);
    },
  }),
};
```

### Step 3: Create the RPC Namespace

```typescript
// query/index.ts
export { queryClient } from './_factories';

import { users } from './users';
import { products } from './products';
import { settings } from './settings';

// This creates your RPC-like interface
export const rpc = {
  users,
  products,
  settings,
} as const;
```

### Step 4: Use in Components

```svelte
<!-- components/UserProfile.svelte -->
<script lang="ts">
  import { createQuery, createMutation } from '@tanstack/svelte-query';
  import { rpc } from '$lib/query';

  export let userId: string;

  // Reactive query - automatically updates UI
  const userQuery = createQuery(rpc.users.getUser(userId).options());
  
  // Reactive mutation - provides loading states
  const updateMutation = createMutation(rpc.users.updateUser.options());

  // Or use imperatively in event handlers
  async function handleQuickUpdate(updates: Partial<User>) {
    const { data, error } = await rpc.users.updateUser.execute({
      ...userQuery.data,
      ...updates
    });

    if (error) {
      toast.error(error.message);
    }
  }
</script>

{#if userQuery.isPending}
  <div>Loading user...</div>
{:else if userQuery.error}
  <div>Error: {userQuery.error.message}</div>
{:else if userQuery.data}
  <UserForm 
    user={userQuery.data}
    onSave={(user) => updateMutation.mutate(user)}
    isSaving={updateMutation.isPending}
  />
{/if}
```

## The Dual Interface Pattern

Every query and mutation provides two ways to use it:

### 1. Reactive Interface (`.options()`)

Best for UI components that need to track state:

```typescript
// Creates a reactive subscription
const query = createQuery(rpc.users.getUser(userId).options());
// Access: query.data, query.isPending, query.error
```

### 2. Imperative Interface (`.execute()` / `.fetchCached()`)

Best for event handlers and workflows:

```typescript
// Direct execution without subscriptions
const { data, error } = await rpc.users.updateUser.execute(user);
// No reactive overhead, just the result
```

## Advanced Patterns

### Runtime Dependency Injection

The query layer can handle dynamic service selection based on runtime conditions:

```typescript
// query/transcription.ts
import { settings } from '../stores/settings';

export const transcription = {
  transcribe: defineMutation({
    resultMutationFn: async (audio: Blob) => {
      // Select service based on user settings
      const provider = settings.value.transcriptionProvider;
      
      switch (provider) {
        case 'openai':
          return services.openai.transcribe(audio, {
            apiKey: settings.value.openaiKey,
            model: settings.value.openaiModel,
          });
        case 'whisper':
          return services.whisper.transcribe(audio);
        default:
          return Err({ code: 'INVALID_PROVIDER', message: `Unknown provider: ${provider}` });
      }
    },
  }),
};
```

### Error Transformation

Transform service errors into UI-friendly formats:

```typescript
// query/users.ts
export const users = {
  createUser: defineMutation({
    resultMutationFn: async (userData: CreateUserInput) => {
      const result = await userService.createUser(userData);
      
      if (result.error) {
        // Transform service error to UI error
        return Err({
          title: 'Failed to create user',
          description: getErrorMessage(result.error.code),
          action: { type: 'retry', data: userData },
        });
      }
      
      return result;
    },
  }),
};

function getErrorMessage(code: string): string {
  switch (code) {
    case 'DUPLICATE_EMAIL':
      return 'A user with this email already exists';
    case 'INVALID_DATA':
      return 'Please check your input and try again';
    default:
      return 'An unexpected error occurred';
  }
}
```

### Coordinating Multiple Services

The query layer can orchestrate complex operations:

```typescript
// query/orders.ts
export const orders = {
  placeOrder: defineMutation({
    resultMutationFn: async (orderData: OrderInput) => {
      // Step 1: Validate inventory
      const inventory = await rpc.inventory.checkAvailability.fetchCached();
      if (!hasStock(orderData.items, inventory.data)) {
        return Err({ code: 'OUT_OF_STOCK', message: 'Some items are out of stock' });
      }

      // Step 2: Process payment
      const payment = await services.payment.charge(orderData.payment);
      if (payment.error) return Err(payment.error);

      // Step 3: Create order
      const order = await services.orders.create({
        ...orderData,
        paymentId: payment.data.id,
      });

      // Step 4: Update caches
      queryClient.invalidateQueries({ queryKey: ['inventory'] });
      queryClient.invalidateQueries({ queryKey: ['orders'] });

      return order;
    },
  }),
};
```

## Testing

The factory pattern makes testing straightforward:

```typescript
// tests/users.test.ts
import { QueryClient } from '@tanstack/query-core';
import { createQueryFactories } from 'wellcrafted/query';
import { vi } from 'vitest';

describe('User Queries', () => {
  let queryClient: QueryClient;
  let defineQuery: ReturnType<typeof createQueryFactories>['defineQuery'];

  beforeEach(() => {
    queryClient = new QueryClient({
      defaultOptions: { queries: { retry: false } }
    });
    ({ defineQuery } = createQueryFactories(queryClient));
  });

  it('should fetch user data', async () => {
    const mockUser = { id: '1', name: 'Test User', email: 'test@example.com' };
    vi.mocked(userService.getUser).mockResolvedValue(Ok(mockUser));

    const userQuery = defineQuery({
      queryKey: ['users', '1'],
      resultQueryFn: () => userService.getUser('1'),
    });

    const result = await userQuery.fetchCached();
    expect(result.data).toEqual(mockUser);
  });
});
```

## Best Practices

1. **Keep Services Pure**: Services should only contain business logic, no UI concerns
2. **Use Result Types**: Always return `Result<T, E>` from services for consistent error handling
3. **Transform Errors in Query Layer**: Convert service errors to UI-friendly formats
4. **Leverage Both Interfaces**: Use reactive for UI state, imperative for workflows
5. **Organize by Feature**: Group related queries together (users, products, etc.)
6. **Cache Thoughtfully**: Update related caches after mutations

## Migration Guide

If you're migrating from a traditional setup:

```typescript
// Before: Direct API calls in components
async function loadUser() {
  try {
    const response = await fetch(`/api/users/${userId}`);
    user = await response.json();
  } catch (error) {
    errorMessage = error.message;
  }
}

// After: Using the query pattern
const userQuery = createQuery(rpc.users.getUser(userId).options());
// Automatically handles loading, error, caching, and refetching
```

## Additional Resources

- [Whispering App](https://github.com/braden-w/whispering) - A real-world example using this pattern
- [TanStack Query Docs](https://tanstack.com/query) - Learn more about the underlying query library
- [Result Type Pattern](/result/README.md) - Understanding Result types for error handling

Commit message:

docs(query): enhance README with overview of query utilities and Result type integration
Updated the README to clarify the purpose of the query utilities, emphasizing their role in bridging service functions returning Result types with TanStack Query's expectations. Added an overview section to improve documentation clarity.

packages/wellcrafted/src/query/README.md, after:

# Query Utilities

A set of utilities for integrating wellcrafted's Result types with TanStack Query, providing a clean pattern for organizing your data fetching layer.

## Overview

The query utilities solve a common integration challenge: your service functions return `Result<T, E>` types, but TanStack Query expects functions that either return data or throw errors. These utilities bridge that gap while providing two convenient interfaces for each query and mutation.

## Quick Start

```typescript
import { QueryClient } from '@tanstack/query-core';
import { createQueryFactories } from 'wellcrafted/query';

// Create your query client
const queryClient = new QueryClient();

// Create factory functions
const { defineQuery, defineMutation } = createQueryFactories(queryClient);
```

## Architecture Pattern: The RPC-like Approach

The query utilities enable a powerful architectural pattern inspired by RPC (Remote Procedure Call), where your query layer acts as a bridge between UI components and pure service functions. This pattern is used successfully in production apps like [Whispering](https://github.com/braden-w/whispering).

```
┌─────────────┐     ┌─────────────┐     ┌──────────────┐
│     UI      │ --> │ Query/RPC   │ --> │   Services   │
│ Components  │     │    Layer    │     │    (Pure)    │
└─────────────┘     └─────────────┘     └──────────────┘
      ↑                    │
      └────────────────────┘
         Reactive Updates
```

### Layer Responsibilities

1. **Services Layer**: Pure functions with no UI dependencies
   - Business logic only
   - Return `Result<T, E>` types
   - Platform-agnostic
   - Easily testable

2. **Query Layer**: Adds reactivity and caching
   - Wraps service calls with TanStack Query
   - Handles runtime dependency injection
   - Transforms errors for UI consumption
   - Manages cache updates

3. **UI Layer**: Consumes queries reactively or imperatively
   - Uses the dual interface pattern
   - Handles loading states
   - Displays errors

## Recommended Folder Structure

Here's how to organize your code for maximum clarity:

```
src/
├── services/           # Pure business logic
│   ├── api/           # External API calls
│   │   ├── users.ts
│   │   └── products.ts
│   ├── db/            # Database operations
│   │   └── index.ts
│   └── platform/      # Platform-specific code
│       ├── web.ts
│       └── desktop.ts
│
├── query/             # Query layer with caching
│   ├── _factories.ts  # createQueryFactories setup
│   ├── users.ts       # User-related queries
│   ├── products.ts    # Product-related queries
│   └── index.ts       # RPC namespace export
│
└── components/        # UI components
    └── UserList.svelte
```

## Real-World Example: Building an RPC Namespace

This example shows how to build a complete data fetching layer:

### Step 1: Create Your Services

```typescript
// services/api/users.ts
import { Ok, Err, type Result } from 'wellcrafted/result';

export type User = {
  id: string;
  name: string;
  email: string;
};

export type UserServiceError = {
  code: 'NOT_FOUND' | 'NETWORK_ERROR' | 'UNAUTHORIZED';
  message: string;
};

export async function getUser(id: string): Promise<Result<User, UserServiceError>> {
  try {
    const response = await fetch(`/api/users/${id}`);
    
    if (!response.ok) {
      if (response.status === 404) {
        return Err({ code: 'NOT_FOUND', message: 'User not found' });
      }
      return Err({ code: 'NETWORK_ERROR', message: 'Failed to fetch user' });
    }
    
    return Ok(await response.json());
  } catch (error) {
    return Err({ code: 'NETWORK_ERROR', message: error.message });
  }
}

export async function updateUser(user: User): Promise<Result<User, UserServiceError>> {
  // Implementation...
}
```

### Step 2: Create Query Definitions

```typescript
// query/_factories.ts
import { QueryClient } from '@tanstack/query-core';
import { createQueryFactories } from 'wellcrafted/query';

export const queryClient = new QueryClient({
  defaultOptions: {
    queries: {
      staleTime: 5 * 60 * 1000, // 5 minutes
      cacheTime: 10 * 60 * 1000, // 10 minutes
    },
  },
});

export const { defineQuery, defineMutation } = createQueryFactories(queryClient);
```

```typescript
// query/users.ts
import { defineQuery, defineMutation, queryClient } from './_factories';
import * as userService from '../services/api/users';

export const users = {
  // Query with parameters
  getUser: (userId: string) => 
    defineQuery({
      queryKey: ['users', userId],
      resultQueryFn: () => userService.getUser(userId),
    }),

  // Query all users
  getAllUsers: defineQuery({
    queryKey: ['users'],
    resultQueryFn: () => userService.getAllUsers(),
  }),

  // Mutation with optimistic updates
  updateUser: defineMutation({
    mutationKey: ['users', 'update'],
    resultMutationFn: async (user: User) => {
      const result = await userService.updateUser(user);
      
      if (result.error) return result;

      // Optimistic cache update
      queryClient.setQueryData(['users', user.id], user);
      queryClient.invalidateQueries({ queryKey: ['users'] });

      return result;
    },
    onError: (error) => {
      // Error is already in the right format for UI
      console.error('Failed to update user:', error);
    },
  }),
};
```

### Step 3: Create the RPC Namespace

```typescript
// query/index.ts
export { queryClient } from './_factories';

import { users } from './users';
import { products } from './products';
import { settings } from './settings';

// This creates your RPC-like interface
export const rpc = {
  users,
  products,
  settings,
} as const;
```

### Step 4: Use in Components

```svelte
<!-- components/UserProfile.svelte -->
<script lang="ts">
  import { createQuery, createMutation } from '@tanstack/svelte-query';
  import { rpc } from '$lib/query';

  export let userId: string;

  // Reactive query - automatically updates UI
  const userQuery = createQuery(rpc.users.getUser(userId).options());
  
  // Reactive mutation - provides loading states
  const updateMutation = createMutation(rpc.users.updateUser.options());

  // Or use imperatively in event handlers
  async function handleQuickUpdate(updates: Partial<User>) {
    const { data, error } = await rpc.users.updateUser.execute({
      ...userQuery.data,
      ...updates
    });

    if (error) {
      toast.error(error.message);
    }
  }
</script>

{#if userQuery.isPending}
  <div>Loading user...</div>
{:else if userQuery.error}
  <div>Error: {userQuery.error.message}</div>
{:else if userQuery.data}
  <UserForm 
    user={userQuery.data}
    onSave={(user) => updateMutation.mutate(user)}
    isSaving={updateMutation.isPending}
  />
{/if}
```

## The Dual Interface Pattern

Every query and mutation provides two ways to use it:

### 1. Reactive Interface (`.options()`)

Best for UI components that need to track state:

```typescript
// Creates a reactive subscription
const query = createQuery(rpc.users.getUser(userId).options());
// Access: query.data, query.isPending, query.error
```

### 2. Imperative Interface (`.execute()` / `.fetchCached()`)

Best for event handlers and workflows:

```typescript
// Direct execution without subscriptions
const { data, error } = await rpc.users.updateUser.execute(user);
// No reactive overhead, just the result
```

## Advanced Patterns

### Runtime Dependency Injection

The query layer can handle dynamic service selection based on runtime conditions:

```typescript
// query/transcription.ts
import { settings } from '../stores/settings';

export const transcription = {
  transcribe: defineMutation({
    resultMutationFn: async (audio: Blob) => {
      // Select service based on user settings
      const provider = settings.value.transcriptionProvider;
      
      switch (provider) {
        case 'openai':
          return services.openai.transcribe(audio, {
            apiKey: settings.value.openaiKey,
            model: settings.value.openaiModel,
          });
        case 'whisper':
          return services.whisper.transcribe(audio);
        default:
          return Err({ code: 'INVALID_PROVIDER', message: `Unknown provider: ${provider}` });
      }
    },
  }),
};
```

### Error Transformation

Transform service errors into UI-friendly formats:

```typescript
// query/users.ts
export const users = {
  createUser: defineMutation({
    resultMutationFn: async (userData: CreateUserInput) => {
      const result = await userService.createUser(userData);
      
      if (result.error) {
        // Transform service error to UI error
        return Err({
          title: 'Failed to create user',
          description: getErrorMessage(result.error.code),
          action: { type: 'retry', data: userData },
        });
      }
      
      return result;
    },
  }),
};

function getErrorMessage(code: string): string {
  switch (code) {
    case 'DUPLICATE_EMAIL':
      return 'A user with this email already exists';
    case 'INVALID_DATA':
      return 'Please check your input and try again';
    default:
      return 'An unexpected error occurred';
  }
}
```

### Coordinating Multiple Services

The query layer can orchestrate complex operations:

```typescript
// query/orders.ts
export const orders = {
  placeOrder: defineMutation({
    resultMutationFn: async (orderData: OrderInput) => {
      // Step 1: Validate inventory
      const inventory = await rpc.inventory.checkAvailability.fetchCached();
      if (!hasStock(orderData.items, inventory.data)) {
        return Err({ code: 'OUT_OF_STOCK', message: 'Some items are out of stock' });
      }

      // Step 2: Process payment
      const payment = await services.payment.charge(orderData.payment);
      if (payment.error) return Err(payment.error);

      // Step 3: Create order
      const order = await services.orders.create({
        ...orderData,
        paymentId: payment.data.id,
      });

      // Step 4: Update caches
      queryClient.invalidateQueries({ queryKey: ['inventory'] });
      queryClient.invalidateQueries({ queryKey: ['orders'] });

      return order;
    },
  }),
};
```

## Testing

The factory pattern makes testing straightforward:

```typescript
// tests/users.test.ts
import { QueryClient } from '@tanstack/query-core';
import { createQueryFactories } from 'wellcrafted/query';
import { vi } from 'vitest';

describe('User Queries', () => {
  let queryClient: QueryClient;
  let defineQuery: ReturnType<typeof createQueryFactories>['defineQuery'];

  beforeEach(() => {
    queryClient = new QueryClient({
      defaultOptions: { queries: { retry: false } }
    });
    ({ defineQuery } = createQueryFactories(queryClient));
  });

  it('should fetch user data', async () => {
    const mockUser = { id: '1', name: 'Test User', email: 'test@example.com' };
    vi.mocked(userService.getUser).mockResolvedValue(Ok(mockUser));

    const userQuery = defineQuery({
      queryKey: ['users', '1'],
      resultQueryFn: () => userService.getUser('1'),
    });

    const result = await userQuery.fetchCached();
    expect(result.data).toEqual(mockUser);
  });
});
```

## Best Practices

1. **Keep Services Pure**: Services should only contain business logic, no UI concerns
2. **Use Result Types**: Always return `Result<T, E>` from services for consistent error handling
3. **Transform Errors in Query Layer**: Convert service errors to UI-friendly formats
4. **Leverage Both Interfaces**: Use reactive for UI state, imperative for workflows
5. **Organize by Feature**: Group related queries together (users, products, etc.)
6. **Cache Thoughtfully**: Update related caches after mutations

## Migration Guide

If you're migrating from a traditional setup:

```typescript
// Before: Direct API calls in components
async function loadUser() {
  try {
    const response = await fetch(`/api/users/${userId}`);
    user = await response.json();
  } catch (error) {
    errorMessage = error.message;
  }
}

// After: Using the query pattern
const userQuery = createQuery(rpc.users.getUser(userId).options());
// Automatically handles loading, error, caching, and refetching
```

## Additional Resources

- [Whispering App](https://github.com/braden-w/whispering) - A real-world example using this pattern
- [TanStack Query Docs](https://tanstack.com/query) - Learn more about the underlying query library
- [Result Type Pattern](/result/README.md) - Understanding Result types for error handling
